SOCRATES' APOLOGY - SELECTED PASSAGES

[From Plato's Apology - Socrates defending his philosophical life]

Men of Athens, I honor and love you; but I shall obey God rather than you, and while I have life and strength I shall never cease from the practice and teaching of philosophy, exhorting any one whom I meet and saying to him after my manner: You, my friend—a citizen of the great and mighty and wise city of Athens—are you not ashamed of heaping up the greatest amount of money and honor and reputation, and caring so little about wisdom and truth and the greatest improvement of the soul, which you never regard or heed at all?

And if the person with whom I am arguing, says: Yes, but I do care; then I do not leave him or let him go at once; but I proceed to interrogate and examine and cross-examine him, and if I think that he has no virtue in him, but only says that he has, I reproach him with undervaluing the greater, and overvaluing the less.

[The famous declaration]

The unexamined life is not worth living. For if I tell you that to do as I say would be a disobedience to the God, and therefore that I cannot hold my tongue, you will not believe that I am serious; and if I say again that daily to discourse about virtue, and of those other things about which you hear me examining myself and others, is the greatest good of man, and that the unexamined life is not worth living, you will think that I am speaking ironically.

[On his wisdom and ignorance]

I am very conscious that I have no wisdom, small or great. What does he mean when he says that I am the wisest of men? And yet he is a god, and cannot lie; that would be against his nature. After long consideration, I thought of a method of trying the question. I reflected that if I could only find a man wiser than myself, then I might go to the god with a refutation in my hand.

[The oracle and self-knowledge]

I know that I know nothing. But when I examined this man—I need not tell you his name, he was a politician—the result was as follows: When I began to talk with him, I could not help thinking that he was not really wise, although he was thought wise by many, and still wiser by himself; and thereupon I tried to explain to him that he thought himself wise, but was not really wise; and the consequence was that he hated me, and his enmity was shared by several who were present and heard me.

[On death and the afterlife]

The hour of departure has arrived, and we go our ways—I to die, and you to live. Which is better God only knows. But I have a hope that death is a good, and that there is something in store for the dead. If death is like a dreamless sleep, how wonderful that would be! But if death is a journey to another place where we can speak with great men who have died before us—what would not a man give to question Homer or Hesiod?

[On virtue and knowledge]

No one does wrong willingly. For surely no one wishes to be deceived about the most important matters in life. When a man does wrong, it is because he does not know what is right. If he truly understood what was good, he would choose it, for no one willingly chooses what they know to be harmful to themselves.

[Final words to his judges]

And now, O men who have condemned me, I would fain prophesy to you; for I am about to die, and in the hour of death men are gifted with prophetic power. And I prophesy to you who are my murderers, that immediately after my departure punishment far heavier than you have inflicted on me will surely await you.

[To those who voted for acquittal]

O my judges—for you I may truly call judges—I should like to tell you of a wonderful circumstance. Hitherto the divine faculty of which the internal oracle is the source has constantly been in the habit of opposing me even about trifles, if I was going to make a slip or error in any matter; and now as you see there has come upon me that which may be thought, and is generally believed to be, the last and worst evil. But the oracle made no sign of opposition, either when I was leaving my house in the morning, or when I was on my way to the court, or while I was speaking, at anything which I was going to say; and yet I have often been stopped in the middle of a speech, but now in nothing I either said or did touching the matter in hand has the oracle opposed me.

What do I take to be the explanation of this silence? I will tell you. It is an intimation that what has happened to me is a good, and that those of us who think that death is an evil are in error. 